DuckDB integration tutorial (#2422)
astronomer/docs: learn/airflow-duckdb.md

## Assumed knowledge

To get the most out of this tutorial, make sure you have an understanding of:

- The basics of DuckDB. See [the DuckDB documentation](https://duckdb.org/docs/guides/index).
- Airflow fundamentals, such as writing DAGs and defining tasks. See [Get started with Apache Airflow](get-started-with-airflow.md).
- Airflow decorators. See [Introduction to Airflow decorators](airflow-decorators.md).
- Airflow connections. See [Manage connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md).

## Prerequisites

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/overview).

## Step 1: Configure your Astro project

To use DuckDB with Airflow, install the [DuckDB Airflow provider](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-provider-duckdb) in your Astro project. This will also install the newest version of the [DuckDB Python package](https://pypi.org/project/duckdb).

1. Create a new Astro project:

    ```sh
    $ mkdir astro-duckdb-tutorial && cd astro-duckdb-tutorial
    $ astro dev init
    ```

2. Add the DuckDB Airflow provider to your Astro project `requirements.txt` file.

    ```text
    airflow-provider-duckdb==0.1.0
    ```

> 3. If you are connecting to the DuckDB cloud service, MotherDuck, you need to use the amd64 version of Astro Runtime to prevent package conflicts. Use the following import statement in your Dockerfile. If you are only using DuckDB locally, you do not need to modify your Dockerfile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If you are connecting to MotherDuck, the DuckDB cloud service, you need to use the amd64 version of Astro Runtime to prevent package conflicts. In this case, replace the `FROM` statement in your Dockerfile with the following line:
```

    ```Dockerfile
    FROM --platform=linux/amd64 quay.io/astronomer/astro-runtime:8.4.0
    ```

## Step 2: Create a DAG using the duckdb Python package

> You can use the [duckdb Python package](https://pypi.org/project/duckdb/) directly in your DAG by utilizing it within your @task decorated tasks. This way of using DuckDB in Airflow does not require you to configure an Airflow connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the [duckdb Python package](https://pypi.org/project/duckdb/) directly in your `@task` decorated tasks. This method does not require you to configure an Airflow connection.
```

1. Start Airflow by running `astro dev start`.

2. Create a new file in your `dags` folder called `duckdb_tutorial_dag_1.py`.

3. Copy and paste the following DAG code into the file:

    <CodeBlock language="python">{duckdb_tutorial_dag_1}</CodeBlock>

>     This simple DAG shows how you can pass a Pandas dataframe from an upstream task into a task utilizing the duckdb Python package to create and query a table in DuckDB. You can control the database you connect to by changing the string in the `duckdb.connect()` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This simple DAG passes a Pandas dataframe from an upstream task to a downstream task. The downstream task uses the duckdb Python package to create and query a table in DuckDB. You can control the database you connect to by changing the string in the `duckdb.connect()` function:
```

>     - Use an empty string to utilize an in-memory database: `duckdb.connect("")`.
>     - Specify a local file path to create/connect to a local DuckDB database in which your table will persist: `duckdb.connect("include/my_garden_ducks.db")`
>     - Specify a MotherDuck connection string without a database to connect to your default MotherDuck database: `duckdb.connect(f"motherduck:?token={YOUR_MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN}")`
>     - Specify a MotherDuck connection string with a database to connect to a specific MotherDuck database: `duckdb.connect(f"motherduck:MY_DB?token={YOUR_MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN}")`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Use an empty string to utilize an in-memory database (For example, `duckdb.connect("")`).
    - Specify a local file path to create/connect to a local DuckDB database in which your table will persist (For example, `duckdb.connect("include/my_garden_ducks.db")`)
    - Specify a MotherDuck connection string without a database to connect to your default MotherDuck database (For example, `duckdb.connect(f"motherduck:?token={YOUR_MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN}")`).
    - Specify a MotherDuck connection string with a database to connect to a specific MotherDuck database (For example, `duckdb.connect(f"motherduck:MY_DB?token={YOUR_MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN}")`)
```

> 4. Run the DAG manually by clicking the play button and view the DAG in the grid view. In the logs of the `create_duckdb_table_from_pandas_df` task you will find a quack for each duck in your garden.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Open Airflow at `http://localhost:8080/`. Run the DAG manually by clicking the play button, then click the DAG name to view the DAG in the **Grid** view. In the logs for `create_duckdb_table_from_pandas_df`, you will find a quack for each duck in your garden.
```

    ![DuckDB tutorial DAG 1 Grid view](/img/tutorials/airflow-duckdb_tutorial_dag_1_grid_view.png)

## Step 3: Create a DuckDB Airflow connection

> Next, you will create another DAG that uses the DuckDB Airflow provider. To use the provider, you will need to define an Airflow connection to your DuckDB database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you will create a DAG that instead uses the DuckDB Airflow provider. To use the provider, you will need to define an Airflow connection to your DuckDB database.
```

1. In the Airflow UI, go to **Admin** -> **Connections** and click **+**. 

2. Create a new connection named `my_duckdb_conn` using the following information:

    - **Connection ID**: `my_duckdb_conn`.
    - **Connection Type**: `DuckDB`.
    - **File (leave blank for in-memory database)**: `include/my_garden_ducks.db`.

3. Click **Save**. Note that you cannot currently test a connection to DuckDB from the Airflow UI.

:::info

> If you are connecting to MotherDuck you will need to specify your connection in the **File (leave blank for in-memory database)** field as `motherduck:<your database name>?token=<your token>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are connecting to MotherDuck, you will need to specify your connection in the **File (leave blank for in-memory database)** field as `motherduck:<your database name>?token=<your token>`.
```

:::

## Step 4: Create a DAG using the Airflow DuckDB provider

1. Create a new file in your `dags` folder called `duckdb_tutorial_dag_2.py`.

3. Copy and paste the following DAG code into the file:

    <CodeBlock language="python">{duckdb_tutorial_dag_2}</CodeBlock>

    This simple DAG will query all information from a table in a DuckDB instance. Make sure the table you are querying exists in the DuckDB instance you specified in your DuckDB connection.

> 4. Run the DAG manually by clicking the play button.

Reviewer: Same suggestion as above, let's mention accessing the Airflow UI

---
title: "Use DuckDB with Apache Airflow"
sidebar_label: "DuckDB"
id: airflow-duckdb
sidebar_custom_props: { icon: 'img/integrations/duckdb.png' }
---

<head>
  <meta name="description" content="Learn how to use DuckDB with Airflow." />
  <meta name="og:description" content="Learn how to use DuckDB with Airflow." />
</head>

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import duckdb_tutorial_dag_1 from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-duckdb/duckdb_tutorial_dag_1.py';
import duckdb_tutorial_dag_2 from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-duckdb/duckdb_tutorial_dag_2.py';

[DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/) is an open-source in-process SQL OLAP database management system. It allows you to run complex queries on relational datasets using SQL both, on local file-based DuckDB instances or by using the cloud service [MotherDuck](https://motherduck.com/).

Airflow can interact with DuckDB in three key ways:

> - Use the duckdb Python package directly in [@task decorated tasks](airflow-decorators.md): This method is useful if you want to do ad-hoc analysis in-memory or combine information stored in various DuckDB files.

Author: waiting on this one depending on Docs team input :)

> - Use the duckdb Python package directly in [@task decorated tasks](airflow-decorators.md): This method is useful if you want to do ad-hoc analysis in-memory or combine information stored in various DuckDB files.

Reviewer: I think Kenten's suggestion is right because we're not referencing the explicit package name here, just that there's a package that exists for DuckDB

- Connect to DuckDB via the [DuckDB Airflow provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/airflow-provider-duckdb/versions/0.1.0): The DuckDB Airflow provider is ideal if you connect to the same DuckDB database from many tasks in your Airflow environment and want to standardize this connection in a central place. You can also use the DuckDBHook to create custom operators to modularize your DuckDB interactions from within Airflow.
- Use DuckDB with the [Astro Python SDK](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html). The Astro Python SDK is an open-source package created by Astronomer to make interactions with relational data simple and tool-agnostic. The Astro Python SDK is the ideal tool if you want to easily connect to several database tools without changing any underlying code. Learn more in the [Write a DAG with the Astro Python SDK](astro-python-sdk.md) tutorial.

:::info

If you are already familiar with DuckDB and Airflow you can clone [Astronomers DuckDB example repository](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-duckdb-examples) and run it locally using the Astro CLI to explore different ways of using DuckDB with Airflow.

:::

> ## Why use Airflow with DuckDB?

Reviewer 2: I think in general having a 'Why' section makes sense for integrations where the non-Airflow tools also has orchestration capabilities (e.g. Databricks, ADF...), or covers a less well-known use case (e.g. SageMaker + Airflow for ML orch). But in cases like this, where orchestration including some sort of DB is almost always needed, I think it's not necessary.

Here, the first bullet is the most interesting to me, but I think that could be integrated into the introduction somehow. I would lean towards doing that and removing this section, but let me know if you think otherwise!

DuckDB is a versatile database management system that allows you to store relational data in-memory, in a local file or in the cloud. 

The benefits of using Airflow with DuckDB include:

- Testing complex Airflow pipelines without the need to connect to a remote database.
- Interact with data in various Python formats such as [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/), [Polars](https://www.pola.rs/) and [PyArrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/index.html).
- Use DuckDB as a database in your Astro SDK pipelines without the need for a remote connection.

## Time to complete

> This tutorial takes approximately 15 minutes to complete.

Reviewer 2: Our first "15 minute" tutorial??? 😍

Author: I mean, I have not timed any of the tutorials, those estimates are gut feelings haha, but this seems like the most straightforward one thus far 😅

## Assumed knowledge

To get the most out of this tutorial, make sure you have an understanding of:

- The basics of DuckDB. See [the DuckDB documentation](https://duckdb.org/docs/guides/index).
- Airflow fundamentals, such as writing DAGs and defining tasks. See [Get started with Apache Airflow](get-started-with-airflow.md).
- Airflow decorators. See [Introduction to Airflow decorators](airflow-decorators.md).
- Airflow connections. See [Manage connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md).

## Prerequisites

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/overview).

## Step 1: Configure your Astro project

> To use DuckDB with Airflow install the [DuckDB Airflow provider](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-provider-duckdb) in your Astro project, this will also install the newest version of the [DuckDB Python package](https://pypi.org/project/duckdb).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use DuckDB with Airflow, install the [DuckDB Airflow provider](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-provider-duckdb) in your Astro project. This will also install the newest version of the [DuckDB Python package](https://pypi.org/project/duckdb).
```

1. Create a new Astro project:

    ```sh
    $ mkdir astro-duckdb-tutorial && cd astro-duckdb-tutorial
    $ astro dev init
    ```

2. Add the DuckDB Airflow provider to your Astro project `requirements.txt` file.

    ```text
    airflow-provider-duckdb==0.1.0
    ```

> 3. If you are connecting to the DuckDB cloud service MotherDuck you need to use the amd64 version of Astro Runtime to prevent package conflicts. You can ensure this by using the following import statement in your Dockerfile. If you are only using DuckDB locally you do not need to modify your Dockerfile.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. If you are connecting to the DuckDB cloud service, MotherDuck, you need to use the amd64 version of Astro Runtime to prevent package conflicts. Use the following import statement in your Dockerfile. If you are only using DuckDB locally, you do not need to modify your Dockerfile.
```

    ```Dockerfile
    FROM --platform=linux/amd64 quay.io/astronomer/astro-runtime:8.4.0
    ```

> ## Step 2: Create a DAG using the duckdb Python package

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Step 2: Create a DAG using the DuckDB Python package
```

Reviewer 2: Oh, hmm....this may be a Docs team grammar question. Do we capitalize based on the name of the package (duckdb), or the name of the tool whose Python package it is (DuckDB). Maybe my correction is wrong...

Author: Yeah, definitely deferring to @jwitz and @lzdanski here. 😅  I used `duckdb` when referring to the Python package and `DuckDB` everywhere else but yes good point, I don't know what would take precedence here.

Reviewer: See comment above, unless we're specifying the exact code line with the package name then I think it's okay to capitalize as if it's part of the product!

You can use the [duckdb Python package](https://pypi.org/project/duckdb/) directly in your DAG by utilizing it within your @task decorated tasks. This way of using DuckDB in Airflow does not require you to configure an Airflow connection.

1. Start Airflow by running `astro dev start`.

2. Create a new file in your `dags` folder called `duckdb_tutorial_dag_1.py`.

3. Copy and paste the following DAG code into the file:

    <CodeBlock language="python">{duckdb_tutorial_dag_1}</CodeBlock>

    This simple DAG shows how you can pass a Pandas dataframe from an upstream task into a task utilizing the duckdb Python package to create and query a table in DuckDB. You can control the database you connect to by changing the `DUCKDB_CONNECTION_URI` variable:

>     - Leave the connection variable empty to use an in-memory: `duckdb.connect("")`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Leave the connection variable empty to use an in-memory database: `duckdb.connect("")`.
```
Since the DAG defaults to using a variable `DUCKDB_CONNECTION_URI`, we should update either the way these bullets are written or the DAG to be consistent. e.g. "Leave....empty" implies to me that the code shows it as empty, but it doesn't, and the bullets below show putting the string directly in `.connect()` instead of updating the `DUCKDB_CONNECTION_URI` variable. I would probably lean towards updating the DAG code and leaving the bullets as-is, but I'll leave it up to you.

Author: 🤔 yeah, good point! as much as I prefer having all variables users might want to change as top-level capitalized vars, I think in this case it makes more sense to "hard code" the connection in the DAGs so the bullet points make the pattern clear.

    - Specify a local file path to create a local DuckDB database in which your table will persist: `duckdb.connect("include/my_garden_ducks.db")`
    - Specify a MotherDuck connection string without a database to connect to your default MotherDuck database: `duckdb.connect(f"motherduck:?token={YOUR_MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN}")`
    - Specify a MotherDuck connection string with a database to connect to a specific MotherDuck database: `duckdb.connect(f"motherduck:MY_DB?token={YOUR_MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN}")`

4. Run the DAG manually by clicking the play button and view the DAG in the grid view. In the logs of the `create_duckdb_table_from_pandas_df` task you will find a quack for each duck in your garden.

    ![DuckDB tutorial DAG 1 Grid view](/img/tutorials/airflow-duckdb_tutorial_dag_1_grid_view.png)

## Step 3: Create a DuckDB Airflow connection

> To use the DuckDB Airflow provider you will need to define an Airflow connection to your DuckDB database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, you will create another DAG that uses the DuckDB Airflow provider. To use the provider, you will need to define an Airflow connection to your DuckDB database.
```

> 2. In the Airflow UI, go to **Admin** -> **Connections** and click **+**. 

Reviewer 2: Numbering is off here, it starts at 2...

3. Create a new connection named `my_duckdb_conn` using the following information:

    - **Connection ID**: `my_duckdb_conn`.
    - **Connection Type**: `DuckDB`.
    - **File (leave blank for in-memory database)**: `include/my_garden_ducks.db`.

4. Click **Save**. Note that you cannot currently test a connection to DuckDB from the Airflow UI.

:::info

> If you want to use an in-memory DuckDB database you can leave the `File (leave blank for in-memory database)` field empty. If you are connecting to MotherDuck you will need to specify your connection in this field as `motherduck:<your database name>?token=<your token>`.

Reviewer 2: The first sentence here probably isn't needed since it's explained in the field name?

Author: Haha, I was thinking that while I typed it, deleted it, added it again to err on the side of leaving stuff in, but yes, I think that is self explanatory. :)
